There is a powerful new club in the north-west of England but its most bankable players are probably unfamiliar, despite raking in hundreds of millions of pounds a year from fans.
Meet Boohoo, PrettyLittleThing and Missguided, the Manchester-based online companies threatening to take over fashion retailing with inexpensive, brash clothes that are more likely to have been inspired by a reality TV star’s clubbing outfit than the catwalk.
Last week, Boohoo bought a controlling stake in PrettyLittleThing, the startup founded by the sons of Boohoo’s co-founder, Mahmud Kamani. With PrettyLittleThing valued at only £5m thanks to an option clause dating back to Boohoo’s flotation prospectus in 2014, the deal was as much of a bargain for shareholders as the £8 clingy dresses its shoppers love.
“The deal provides Boohoo with a complementary brand at a really attractive valuation,” says Phil Adams, chief executive of GCA Altium, who advised Boohoo. The purchase gives Boohoo shareholders – who have seen the value of their holdings quadruple this year – a slice of one of the fastest-growing young fashion brands in the UK at the moment.
The driving force behind PrettyLittleThing is 28-year-old Umar Kamani, who started the brand with his brothers in 2012. Sales surged 400% to £17m in the 12 months to end of February 2016 as its target market of teenagers and twentysomethings snapped up edgy fashions created with so-called “influencers” like Lionel Richie’s 18-year-old model daughter, Sofia. Sales are expected to ratchet up by another 150% this year.
Online fashion aimed at young women is currently the sweet spot in a tough fashion market, because low prices keep wardrobe updates within reach of even the tightest budgets.
“The teenage wallet has its limitations,” explains Boohoo’s joint chief executive, Carol Kane. “We don’t have a high returns rate: our shoppers don’t want to tie up their money. If they are spending £20 on a dress they won’t spend £40 ordering two sizes. They don’t have that kind of money. It is quite different to the middle market.”
Kane adds that key to PrettyLittleThing’s success is the age of the founders: “Umar is from the same generation as his customers.” That means he knows his peers are glued permanently to their phones, scrolling through social networks. They want to be able to flick through a digital wardrobe packed with thousands of bodycon dresses, jumpsuits and thigh-high boots while they are at the bus stop, thinking about what they are going to wear on their next night out.
She describes the Boohoo brand, which has a broader clothing offering, as “more inclusive” than its younger, sister brand. “The Pretty Little Thing shopper is sassy, glamorous and body confident,” she says. “I would definitely say she is confident.”
While this wave of digital fashion businesses, which includes rivals such as Missguided and Public Desire, look like overnight success stories, they have generations of experience to draw on as the founders are typically scions of successful clothing importers based in the region. Mahmud Kamani’s father Abdullah, who escaped war-torn Kenya in the 60s to start a new life in England, started out selling handbags on a market stall but went on to become a successful high street clothing supplier. The family reaped £240m from the IPO in 2014.
“Online fashion retailers don’t have the legacy of stores to worry about,” says Boohoo chairman Peter Williams. “If they get traction with customers, as both Boohoo and Pretty Little Thing has done, they can grow very quickly.”
“Being able to source great product at a sensible price has been one of Boohoo’s great strengths,” he adds. “Celebrity trends can be interpreted very quickly and the stock turns [over] at a fantastic rate ... it’s a very dynamic model.”
Missguided is another Manchester-based brand enjoying breakneck growth. In the year to March, its chief executive, Nitin Passi, says sales increased by a third to £117m, and that the business is currently enjoying growth of more than 60%. Profits were down, though, as it invested in a new headquarters in Salford Quays and warehousing, and went on a hiring spree, recruiting 336 head office staff in the last 18 months.
“This enables us to scale the business,” explains Passi. “We are going after growth in the UK and internationally.”
Passi, whose father is a successful clothing supplier, started the site in 2009 when he was in his mid-20s. Rather than describe its model as “fast fashion”, he prefers “rapid fashion”, as 300 lines land on the site every week and it has the ability to get a new design on sale within 10 days. Missguided has recently opened its first store in London with plans to open more around the country in 2017.
He insists the business is not built on his family connections, as their expertise is in dressing a different demographic. “I borrowed £50,000 from my dad in 2009 and paid him back in 2010,” he says. Missguided is based in Manchester mainly because Passi’s uncle offered him free office space at the back of one of his factories to get started.
Missguided has sought to differentiate itself from rivals with edgy branding that includes the promise to “create killer garms for the dreamers, believers and night lovers”.
“A lot of retailers were playing it quite safe so we decided to be a bit more real in the way we spoke to our customers,” says Passi. The 34-year-old entrepreneur agrees competition is hotting up but adds: “In the zero to £20m [sales bracket] there are a lot of players, but above £50m not so many. We focus on the customer, not the competition.”
Manchester’s fashion stars are burning bright at the moment but Williams adds a cautionary note: “The internet means if a brand has momentum it can grow very quickly. Obviously you don’t hear about the ones that don’t make it.”
You’ll have seen the billboards. Usually on the tube or side of a bus, usually featuring diverse models wearing something revealing, sheer and sparkly, and usually with the price writ large on the poster. You might not have bought anything from Boohoo or Missguided or Pretty Little Thing, but that’s because they’re not for you. These brands are for Generation Z. Cheap, disposable, ethically dubious and arbitrarily named, this new wave of online-only retailers mark a shift in how we’re shopping and what we’re buying, and prove that superfast fashion is only getting faster.
Their success comes down a series of tactics. The Missguided site uses terms like “sick” and “fire” alongside expletives and puns that speak to a very specific Snapchatting age-group. It also features Amina Blue, fashion’s current It model (she’s 5’1”, mixed race, and has appeared on the Kanye West’s Yeezy catwalk). Boohoo, meanwhile, has Sofia Richie (daughter of Lionel, famous for being photographed with Justin Bieber) as its campaign star. Both models speak to post-Instagram girls.
Is this merely a triumph of marketing over clothes? Not likely. Shopping has morphed from a high-street industry based on accessibility and affordability to an increasingly online model which encourages risk and whim. These clothes are so cheap you can afford to risk buying them without trying them.
Ever-increasing prices at Topshop have created a gap in the market for cheaper newcomers. This used to be Asos, and arguably still is, but the online retailer that is the largest in the UK has also inspired smaller, cheaper, younger versions in a similar mould. What they do is different to, say, Topshop or Zara, because the clothes are geared towards millennials and Generation Z, and also because they’re less catwalk-led and more inspired by the red carpet.
If we’re buying online it’s because we’re time-poor and we want a quick solution, whether it’s a last-minute party or something deeper and psychological, and these brands fill that hole.
So if there’s no term for the opposite of “investment purchase”, we need to come up with one, because these brands are taking over.
Morwenna Ferrier
What should I wear to my boss’s Christmas party tomorrow night?
Zzzzzip! Record scratch! Sorry to interrupt, folks: normal service will be resumed next week, but this week we celebrate the festive season by going through the best and worst fashion moments of the year. Honestly, it’s what Jesus wanted us to do. He said so, right after he ticked off John the Baptist for his hopelessly passé robe. “Bias cut is soooo BC, John,” he said, as the two of them strolled along the river Jordan. Maybe. I might be less clear on my New Testament than my Vogue.
Let’s start with the downers. Well, it was a strange year. Breasts, for a start, we consigned to the bin. Vogue decreed that cleavage was “over”, and the adoring shots of Elizabeth Debicki’s frequently bra-strap-free back in The Night Manager seemed to confirm this. Rather sweetly, Vogue tried to pretend that theirs was a feminist declaration: “The tits will not be out for the lads. Nor anyone else, for that matter.” How marvellous! No longer will women suffer the tyranny of Eva Herzigova because a whole new body shape will be celebrated. Hurrah for the inclusivity of fashion! Go feminist fashion! Bog off, boobs!
Wait, what’s that noise? I think it might be a giant “EXCEPT” coming down the pipeline. EXCEPT perhaps it is because Vogue lives in an airless world populated only by the underfed and underweight but it seemed, rather sweetly, to have forgotten that not all women need Wonderbras to manage more than a C-cup. Breasts are not, in fact, just some novelty accessory we’ve been dabbling in, like Carrie necklaces or turbans. Going unsupported is not an option for some of us, at least not without giving ourselves two black eyes. So what to do for us, the unlucky few left with unfashionable breasts that can’t simply be slammed away in a drawer? One broadsheet had the answer: “How to dress when you hate your breasts,” read its headline. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is I believe what’s known as coming full circle.
We also hit peak athleisure, with the arrival of Chloé’s £1,000 tracksuit, a joke straight out of Nathan Barley. There was also peak squad, with various female celebrities clamouring on social media to show off their popularity, holidays and fat-free bodies, from Taylor Swift’s overly Instagrammed 4 July party to Cara Delevingne’s hyperbolically Instagrammed Maldives holiday. Confusingly, we also hit peak peak, so it is of utmost importance that someone come up with the 2017 word for something being over (“basic” is definitely over, as, incidentally, is over).
All right, quit your complaining already, woman! What has been good this year? Glad you ask, I reply to myself. Well, by some measure, my favourite fashion(ish) news story of the year was the undoubtedly totally true one about Kate Moss dumping her boyfriend, the great great grandson of Otto von Bismarck, after he switched off the Wi-Fi in Moss’s home during an argument, meaning her teenage daughter couldn’t use Snapchat and Instagram. You can imagine how that went down with a 14-year-old. Try to find one element in that story that doesn’t bring you some modicum of amusement. I know! You literally can’t! Anyway, young Von Bismarck and Moss are back together so not only is this story hilarious, it also has a happy ending. Whether Moss’s daughter feels the return of the Wi-Fi killer is a happy ending, however, is as yet unknown.
Otherwise, the year was really about two labels – Vetements and Gucci. My much-beloved colleague Jess Cartner-Morley wrote about Vetements’ year last week, so indulge me instead in my Gucci obsession. Put it this way: there are two kinds of fashion fans: the cool ones, and the ones who get distracted with funny things such as embroidered leopards and purple shoes. If you are cool, you like Vetements, and if you are more in the latter camp then you are a Gucci person and God bless you and Gucci’s designer, Alessandro Michele, for it. Fashion hasn’t been this fun since Marc Jacobs used to be fun.
The return of the 90s has been quite amusing-slash-traumatic for those of us who remember the 90s very, very clearly. There’s something about seeing a teenager in a slip dress and jumper to make you muse on your youth. And there’s nothing like realising said teenager wasn’t even alive in the 90s to make you realise how long ago the 90s were.
Finally, I’d like to end this retrospective column by bidding a sad farewell to a fashion item I very much hoped would be a part of all of our lives for the next four to eight years. I speak, of course, of Hillary Clinton’s pantsuits. Remember them? One in every colour! So cheering, so dependable. Never mind your politics (although you’re reading the Guardian, so who are we kidding here?), wouldn’t you rather be seeing those pantsuits on the news than that orange face and tonsorial monstrosity? My heart hurts just thinking about those pantsuits, to be honest. So forget about those Hadid sisters: 2016 was about the pantsuit. But not 2017, alas.
Prada, one of the world’s most expensive fashion brands, is making little effort to show that its goods are free of forced labour, according to a new report.
An assessment (pdf) of the quality and transparency of efforts by 20 major apparel companies to safeguard against forced labour from their supply chains, undertaken by KnowTheChain, an accountability initiative, gave Prada a score of nine out of 100.
The Italian luxury brand, which charges hundreds of pounds for its bags and clothing, was one of three companies that scored less than 25 out of 100. The other two were China’s top shoe firm, Belle International Holdings, and Shenzhou International Group Holdings, another Chinese company.
Companies were ranked by KnowTheChain on a range of indicators including auditing processes, worker recruitment and labour rights, using information provided by the brands and data available on public platforms.
Other luxury brands also returned modest scores, including Ralph Lauren and Hugo Boss, with 45 and 46 out of 100 respectively. According to KnowTheChain, companies scoring more than 46 are considered to have taken “initial steps” to show awareness and commitment to addressing human trafficking and forced labour in their supply chains.
Some companies that fared badly in the study did so because they failed to provide information about efforts they may be making to safeguard against forced labour.
“It would be hard to fathom a company taking steps to address slavery in its supply chains and then failing or refusing to disclose it publicly,” said Kilian Moote, project director of KnowTheChain. “I think what we can deduce from the rankings is that some companies have a long way to go before they are adequately addressing the risk of the worst forms of labour abuses in the makings of their products.”
Hugo Boss acknowledged that it had supplied KnowTheChain with information but said that, with dialogue ongoing, it preferred not to offer a statement at the present time.
High-street companies scored far more highly in the study than luxury brands. Adidas (81), Gap (77) and H&M (69), all of which have robust systems to check their supply chains for slavery, were among those that received the highest ratings.
All companies fared badly on worker recruitment and rights, with many brands failing to put any practices in place for workers to air grievances or form unions.
The International Labour Organisation considers the apparel industry to be at high risk of forced labour and other forms of slavery. There are an estimated 75 million people working in the global garment sector, three-quarters of whom are women.
Goods produced in exploitative conditions include cotton. The US State Department has estimated that forced labour exists in nine countries producing 65% of the world’s cotton, including China, India and Uzbekistan.
The high levels of public transparency and reporting of anti-slavery initiatives among high-street brands follow years of damaging exposés into labour abuses connected to such companies
The luxury fashion world has come under less scrutiny than “fast-fashion” high-street brands. Prada, Ralph Lauren and Hugo Boss also received low ratings in this year’s fashion transparency index, which used similar indicators to assess how well brands were doing at ensuring their products remain free of labour abuses.
“Two conclusions can be made from low-scoring brands, like Prada. Either they are taking excellent action in secret, or these high-status brands don’t yet have the safeguards in place to reassure their customers, and appear to be falling behind their competitors,” said Phil Bloomer, executive director of the Business & Human Rights Resource Centre.
“Top-ranking brands like Adidas and Gap have listened to workers and activists in their supply chains. Their scores in this ranking show it is commercially viable and ethically imperative to seek to eliminate modern slavery in supply chains.”
Sliding deadlines for safety improvements following the Rana Plaza disaster demonstrate why the Bangladesh government must act (Bangladeshi workers still in danger despite safety pledges, says report, 21 November).
Rana Plaza made the potentially deadly conditions in garment factories impossible to ignore. Safety improvements promoted by retailers have brought some positive changes but, given the scale of the problem in Bangladesh, these cannot tackle the root of the problem on their own, and they are not exclusive to garment factories – so what about other sectors?
Basic safety measures such as fire escapes should be emphasised (and brands need to invest), but if Bangladesh truly wants to help the women who labour in the factories it must think bigger and longer term to find sustainable solutions. Key to this will be diversifying the economy to create better jobs and strengthen workers’ rights so that women have more job options for a better future, and employers compete to attract workers by offering the best conditions.
Farah Kabir
Country director, ActionAid Bangladesh
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Austin Reed is returning to the high street seven months after the tailoring specialist collapsed into administration with the loss of 1,000 jobs.
The retail chain’s 120 stores closed in June, but new owner Edinburgh Woollen Mill is investing £100m in a relaunch.
Edinburgh Woollen Mill Group bought the brand when it only had a handful of concessions. It plans to open 50 Austin Reed stores by early 2018, including a London flagship. The brand’s website has relaunched and the first new stores are expected to open before the end of this year.
The Country Casuals and Viyella brands, which the group bought along with Austin Reed, will be relaunched in Edinburgh Woollen Mills stores early next year.
Austin Reed’s customers included Winston Churchill and Elizabeth Taylor in its glory days, but the retail chain struggled for several years before going into administration in April.
While the menswear market is growing faster than womenswear, Austin Reed has faced rising competition from Ted Baker, Reiss, Marks & Spencer and a revived Moss Bros.
The planned store openings were announced as Edinburgh Woollen Mill, which is privately owned by the Cumbria-based entrepreneur Philip Day, reported a 2.4% rise in sales to £576.3m in the year to 27 February. The group, which also owns fashion retailer Peacocks, homeware chain Ponden Mill and golfing brand ProQuip, said pre-tax profits before exceptional items increased by 2.4% to £90.9m. All of the group’s brands had achieved sales growth at established stores, it said.
The company said it planned to open a total of 200 stores by early 2018. In the past year, the group opened 43 stores in the UK and Ireland.
Steve Simpson, the group commercial director of Edinburgh Woollen Mill, said: “By focusing on quality and giving customers exceptional value for money and positive customer service, we have continued to grow despite increased competition.
“With the addition of Austin Reed, which we acquired earlier this year, as well as Country Casuals and Viyella, we aim to continue this organic growth, while always being ready to respond to other opportunities as they arise.”
It would be cruel to describe the front row of a fashion show – where the most senior members of the fashion press are hierarchically seated – as resembling the bar scene in Star Wars, populated by creatures, good and evil, who seem not of this world. But it would be fair to say it’s hard to imagine the majority of them thriving in any other arena than fashion. This has never been the case with Alexandra Shulman, British Vogue’s longest serving editor-in-chief.
I helped to cover fashion shows for the Guardian for a decade and, among her peacock-like colleagues, it was Shulman, as self-contained as a French hen, who intrigued me the most. While she is certainly in the fashion world, she never looks entirely of it, and I always found it easy to imagine her doing something entirely different: writing novels, say, out of her home in north London – which, in fact, she has since done (her second novel was published last year).
The template for a fashion magazine editor has been carved by Shulman’s American counterpart, Anna Wintour, the notoriously fearsome editor of US Vogue. But Shulman has eschewed the kind of celebrity Wintour and other Vogue editors have embraced, and largely ignored the exhausting beauty regimes that are generally seen as part of the job (“I can only stick so far to ‘Il faut souffrir pour être belle’. The less souffrir going on the better, I feel,” she writes in this book.)
But the differences are deeper than mere aesthetics. With fashion journalists, the divide is generally between those who think of themselves as part of the fashion industry and those who think of themselves as journalists. Shulman, despite being at the centre of the fashion world for three decades, has always struck me as being in the latter camp, perhaps because she is the daughter of journalists (her mother is the features writer Drusilla Beyfus and her late father, Milton Shulman, was the Evening Standard’s theatre critic).
Her articles are often far more frank than the cliche of the crushingly controlled fashion editor would lead one to expect. When she interviewed Kate Moss in 2007, she was pleasingly blunt about the model’s, shall we say, changeable nature (“[Moss] makes me feel as welcome as a case of leprosy,” she wrote). When she turned 50, she marked the occasion by writing about how her sense of style has changed over the years – a classic Vogue subject, you might think, although in Shulman’s hands it turned into a reminiscence of how she’s “always had a pretty dodgy figure” and how little interest she has in fashion in her personal wardrobe.
But this is not to suggest that Shulman is any less scary than the more typical fashion editor. I have written for both her and Wintour and, in terms of the fear factor, I’d put them at pretty much level pegging. Whereas Wintour’s froideur verges on the self-parodic, Shulman’s terseness is less easy to dismiss, because she seems more from the realm of normality. I’ve wondered if this was a protective shield she adopted as a high-powered woman working in an industry full of people constantly asking for favours, or simply what she was like. So I was curious to read her somewhat confusingly titled book, Inside Vogue: A Diary of My 100th Year (it is, of course, not Shulman’s 100th year but that of British Vogue). She is a candid writer and I was intrigued to see whether she would apply such candour to herself.
The answer is: yes, she does, as much as she can. This book, structured as a diary, could have just been a bit of easy puffery for Vogue, with Shulman crowing about the magazine’s centenary and its triumphs over the past year (photographing the Duchess of Cambridge, photographing Kate Moss – again!). And there is a fair bit of that. But Shulman has also produced a funny and surprisingly pacy read. She is a wry, subtle writer, and as I was reading it in the evenings I was – and here’s a sentence I never thought I’d write – genuinely looking forward to getting into bed with Shulman every night.
Her anecdotes are all the more amusing for her light touch, especially the ones about celebrities she encounters, all of whom adhere to their own cliche: Charles Saatchi is just as tedious and weird as you’d expect; Naomi Campbell is a high-maintenance nightmare. She is even more cutting about the newspaper columnists who use Vogue as a punchbag without acknowledging that their own publications are just as bad at reducing women to their physical appearance (the Daily Mail’s Liz Jones and Sarah Vine get some especially well-earned jabs). About designers and fashion brands, Shulman is blandly polite, but there’s only so much candour a Vogue editor can afford without scaring the advertisers.
Shulman is most amusing when she writes about herself. She is generally “bad-tempered”, “stressed” and “anxious” – often about work, but also her boiler and Brent Council’s recycling programme (“a system of unbelievable complexity”), two subjects you can’t really imagine Wintour writing about. So next time Shulman barks terrifyingly down the phone at me, I’ll console myself that this has as much to do with north London’s waste disposal processes as it does with my own shortcomings.
Amid the parties with Eddie Redmayne and Kim Kardashian, she interweaves glimpses of the sacrifices she has made to get as far as she has, particularly regarding her son, Sam, and the “wonderful nannies” who looked after him during fashion weeks while Shulman was “crying in the car on the way to the airport”. She hesitates to describe herself as a feminist, preferring instead to say she just gets on with things, and there is something equally old school about the way she writes about Sam and her clearly adored long‑term partner, the journalist David Jenkins. Rarely does she overtly express her love, preferring instead to repeat their frequent jokes at her expense.
She admits that this diary is essentially an Instagram version of her life – “everything we put out about ourselves is edited” – and certain notable subjects are omitted. Most obviously, she never nails why models are so thin, instead merely expressing increasing irritation at being asked about it all the time. But to go into that would require more criticism of fashion designers than even she can allow herself. In the main, this diary has the smack of clear-eyed honesty from a sensible, self-aware woman who works in, and loves, a blithely senseless world.
• Inside Vogue is published by Fig Treet. To order a copy for £13.93 (RRP£16.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
Caitlin Robbins always struggled to find clothes for her dad that didn’t make him look and feel frumpy. As someone with ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease – which impacts people’s ability to walk, talk, and ultimately, to breathe – her dad wanted comfortable and tailored options. But most of the clothes she could find that didn’t restrict his movement, such as pants with an elastic waist and pullover tops, only made him look awful.
“My father was always particular about fashion; he wanted to look nice and dignified,” says Robbins, a fashion design student. “I wanted to design him outfits to be visually different, functional but still stylish.”
Robbins’s experience points to a seemingly untapped opportunity for apparel makers to serve people with disabilities. One in five American adults, or 53.3 million people, report having disabilities, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Trouble with mobility, cognition and living independently are the three most common types of disabilities.
Finding well-fitting clothes isn’t just about looking good. Research shows that a lack of functional and tailored clothes can make people with disabilities feel excluded during job search or at social events.
So far, the market is mostly served by small companies such as Buck and Buck in Seattle and Silverts, which designs clothes for customers with rheumatoid arthritis, recovering from strokes or in wheelchairs. Nike has also dabbled in this market with a line of sneakers, after getting a request from a 16-year-old boy with cerebral palsy. The shoes use a wraparound zipper rather than shoelaces, and they also come with a larger opening to make it easy to get in and out of. After an online, limited release last fall, Nike has since launched new basketball and running shoes with the same design.
Per consumer request, Land’s End has offered modified swimsuit designs for women with a mastectomy since 1995. The modification includes a raised neckline and armhole of a conventional swimsuit to cover scar tissue or sensitive skin due to radiation. The bra contains a prosthesis pocket and no underwire. Land’s End designers personally meet with breast cancer survivors to help guide the design, according to Michele Casper, vice president public relations at the company.
And, for a while, J Crew also used to stock a green walking cane for those needing additional support.
While the market for this type of specialty clothes is small and difficult to quantify, it’s attracting growing interest, especially in design schools. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology launched Open Style Lab in 2014 to bring together students in design, engineering and occupational therapy to create clothes for people with disabilities. Researchers at MIT’s International Design Center have created fashions to include fewer sensory triggers such as fraying, rough zippers and scratchy tags for children and adults with autism because of their sensitivity to certain textures and colors.
Outside of the US, designers from Brazil to Hong Kong have made it their mission to serve this niche market. Students like Sophie Neff at Nottingham Trent University in the UK have created a knitwear collection for people in wheelchairs. Neff’s designs include putting pockets on thighs rather than the back of the pants for easier access and tight fitting cuffs to prevent the sleeves from getting caught in the wheels.
While these efforts are encouraging, they fall short in serving the market fully, especially in designing apparel that’s chic and injects self-confidence into the wearer, says Luz Pascal, a professor at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York City. Pascal was the professor who encouraged Robbins, a student at the institute, to channel her desire to design for her dad into a class project. The goal: creating clothes for people with mobility issues, such as veterans who lost a limb at war or those whose illnesses make it challenging for them to open and close buttons.
Amazing designs resulted. Robbins’s creation included a wool blend jacket and pants for her dad with special details such as extra concealed zippers that offer a wider opening to pull on and off and unzip more easily when using the electric patient lifts for the restroom. Her classmate, Elvira Pena, designed a blanket with special panels – with Braille in some cases – to help children with visual impairment or other disabilities to learn things such as shapes and colors.
The students used real-life models for their project, and working with them was an uplifting experience for everyone. “It’s rewarding to see someone smile because you made them look good,” Pascal says.
But making a business case for creating these specialty designs has proven a challenge. Creating affordable clothes requires producing them at scale, which is not often possible when designs have to be customized to accommodate different types of disabilities. For example, one of Pascal’s students fashioned outfits for a veteran who wanted to avoid fabric draping over her missing arm. “It demands greater skill and creativity to address this segment of the population,” Luz says.
Pena recalls the difficulty of finding a manufacturer and sponsor for her learning blanket, which incorporates six detachable panels containing visual, sensory, tactile and other educational activities. Factory representatives told her the panel design was too complex, and that meant Pena had to simplify her product to make it easier to mass produce. “It will require a company that wants to help and create outside-the-box products for smaller markets,” she says.
Orsola de Castro, founder of the nonprofit Fashion Revolution, which wants to make the fashion industry value people, the environment and share profits more equally, hopes the market for people with disabilities will become as viable as the growing segment that touts the use of sustainable and recycled materials.
“For this niche market to grow, big brands will have to be willing to accept lower profits and see values in providing an important service,” de Castro says. “Many doubted sustainable fashion as viable – and look at the growth we’ve seen.”
In July, Kendall Jenner walked across a glass-topped Trevi Fountain in a blue astrakhan coat with full swing skirt. Fendi had hired private jets to fly guests from the couture shows in Paris straight to Rome, where the label had recently invested €2.5m into the fountain’s 18-month rehab. “It will go down,” wrote Nicole Phelps in Vogue, “as one of the most majestic show venues ever.”
Three months later I’m pushing politely through thousands of American tourists to see the renovated fountain for myself. People lean in with waterproof selfie sticks, queuing for a chance to grin beside the gleaming horses. Visitors throw in almost €3,000 a day. During its renovation, the water was drained from the fountain, but a small basin was set up so tourists wouldn’t miss out on any potential luck.
“The city is part of our creative heritage,” said Silvia Venturini Fendi, third-generation member of the family fashion house. “It’s like an open-air museum where inspiration can come from anywhere.” Fendi is not the only fashion house investing in Italy’s monuments: Bulgari has donated €1.5m to restore the Spanish Steps, and Tod’s, of loafer fame, has put up €25m to repair the Colosseum.
It seems apt that this city, its story so tightly wound with ideas of luxury and taste, can be propped up by fashion brands in a way that, say, London can’t. The idea of Topshop sponsoring a clean-up of Nelson’s Column is almost unthinkable.
It’s a short walk from the Fountain to the Steps, the air warm and thick with the smell of candied peanuts and drains. On the way, I meet a woman briskly directing her young daughter through the dawdling tourists. Marta has lived in Rome all her life, and watched the renovations with some suspicion. “Oh, they’re beautiful,” she says, “but they’re not for us.”
Preserving Italy’s landmarks is crucial for the businesses whose heritages are invested in it. “The Spanish Steps are at the heart of our history,” explained Lucia Silvestri, creative director of Bulgari. ‘‘They’re between Via Sistina, where Sotirio Bulgari opened in 1884, and our flagship in Via dei Condotti.” But what their investment says to locals, believes Marta and her friends, is that the government can’t be relied upon to protect their monuments, let alone improve their transport system or police the streets. “And even when it looks like something is changing to improve Rome” – meaning the place her child goes to school, rather than “Rome”, the place of honeymoons and prosecco – she adds, “the red tape means it takes forever.”
The Spanish Steps were unveiled at the end of September, just before Bulgari’s accessories presentation in Milan. The project involved more than 80 restorers, who repaired the 32,300 sq ft of travertine stone. In the bright autumn light, they gleam grey-white between the tired legs of slumped, lunching tourists, despite Mayor Virginia Raggi having ordered police to stop people “loitering”.
Following their restoration, Paolo Bulgari (chairman of the jewellery house) told La Repubblica that their restorers had removed coffee, wine, chewing gum, “but now I am worried. If we don’t set strict rules, the steps will go back to being used as a camping site for barbarians.” A Plexiglas barrier, he said to waves of controversy, “doesn’t seem like an impossible task”. Perhaps, I wonder, as I climb the steps and look out on the selfie-stick sellers and tourists kissing, it’s the inevitable consequence of luxury brands taking over a city. The introduction of VIP areas.
At the beginning of September, Justine Tabak launched her first eponymous collection. At 52, with a high-flying career as a designer and creative director with Fendi, Laura Ashley, M&S, Jigsaw, LK Bennett and Boden under her belt, Tabak is treading tentatively with her fledgling label. So why did she walk away from a secure, well-paid and coveted job with a high-profile brand, to risk everything in a highly competitive marketplace?
“Having spent the last decade or so working with factories in China, I felt passionately that I wanted to work more closely with British manufacturers and collaborate with creative communities that I could build relationships with,” explains the entrepreneur, whose label features the tagline: “Inspired, fashioned and made in the British Isles.”
Tabak’s start-up works with a small family-run factory in London that also works with established labels such as Victoria Beckham, Roland Mouret and House of Holland. And they are not alone: a number of smaller enterprises, high street brands and international labels are supporting the resurgence of the UK as a fashion manufacturing hub.
As a fashion consultant and a former head of UK production for Roland Mouret, Daliah Simble-Hearn, explains: “I can remember a time when London was full of pockets of manufacturers, and you could spend a day going from factory to factory.
“Two decades on, while we don’t have the density of those factories, the growth potential is there. Communities are evolving again and interestingly with a new skill-set and dynamic that is fulfilling both the luxury and the high street sectors.”
Just this month, English Fine Cottons, a brand new, state-of-the-art spinning business, opened in a reconditioned mill in Tameside, Greater Manchester, in a bid to satisfy demand for luxury goods with a “Made in Britain” stamp, throughout the supply chain.
According to the UK Fashion and Textile Association, this renewed interest in British-made clothing and textiles has seen the number of people employed in the sector grow by 9% in the past five years, with predictions that up to 20,000 more jobs could be created by 2020.
Ellie Lines, a stylist and designer, launched her label in 2014 and uses a production facility in west London to print her bespoke fabrics and make her collection of dresses and separates. She said the choice of factory was intended “to reduce the carbon footprint of fashion” and was “a reaction to the endless brands that launch with their name and ‘London’ on the label, but who manufacture in China, and that drives me insane. The implication is that it is made here, but it’s not. I am proud of my ‘designed and made with love in London’ stance.”
Nicola Woods’s womenswear label, Beautiful Soul – which was launched five years ago and is worn by the likes of Taylor Swift, Livia Firth and Pippa Middleton – is created in and around London, and Woods aims to open her “own manufacturing unit in England and develop international wholesale distribution”.
When former Gap PR Buffy Reid and her father, Columba, a retired knitwear industry executive, launched their label And Daughter three years ago, they wanted to support the mills and factories in Donegal and Scotland by producing a contemporary collection of timeless knitwear staples. Starting with 10 styles, they have evolved to sell 40 pieces via their website, Selfridges and the Conran Shop in London as well as independent stores in Japan, the US and Europe.
Basing their production in Britain enables those behind the brands to meet face-to-face with fabric producers and printers, cutters, machinists and others involved in the process, giving them more control over the entire process.
“There are definitely some very passionate people putting domestic manufacturing on the road again,” says Tabak, who last week was a keynote speaker at the Make it British forum in Leicester, traditionally the heart of the UK’s garment-making industry. “After years of working with mass producers in far-flung places it’s good to be able to meet people in the UK that can make it happen and fly the flag for homegrown talent and industry.”
Kate Hills, a former designer and buyer for M&S and Burberry, founded Make it British six years ago in response to growing demand for UK manufacturing, and helps match designers and brands to production facilities. “I could see prices in the Far East were going up and wanted to do what I could to help the dwindling supply chain we have in the UK, which is still held in high regard around the world,” says Hills.
“Now, I get around 2,000 businesses a month contact me to try to find manufacturers in the UK. Asos, Jigsaw, Topshop and M&S all still make some of their clothes here and, according to HM Customs and Excise there has been a 25% rise in the export of British-made clothing since 2011.”
And, while the pound is weak and the international luxury goods houses struggle to define what high-spending customers want and to retain the prestige of their labels, the renaissance of craftsmanship seems to be helping the boom in British manufacturing.
Mimi Berry launched her leather accessories brand in London’s East End 15 years ago, and now uses three local factories as well as one in Manchester and another in the west country – staffed by a number of former Clarks shoes workers – to produce around 1,400 handbags and satchels each season.
“We have stockists in Paris who sell our bags alongside Louis Vuitton and YSL, and so we are seen on a par with homegrown French brands,” says Berry of her collection, which exports to Japan, France, Switzerland and the US.
“I think it shows a certain intelligence to be confident about the provenance of your wardrobe. The more I work with our British factories and grow to know the families behind them, I knew I was directly helping the people I could see working there. I feel a certain responsibility to support the British workforce and the great heritage we have.”
Britain’s biggest supermarket has warned that dearer food prices triggered by the plunge in the value of the pound will have a lethal impact on poor families worst affected by the expected jump in inflation over the next two years.
Although a price war among the leading food retailers has so far blunted the impact of more expensive imports on grocery bills, Tesco’s UK chief executive, Matt Davies, said rising prices would be “toxic” for consumers if stores found that they had to pass on extra costs.
Official figures from the Office for National Statistics showed the annual inflation rate rising from 0.6% to 1% in September, its highest for almost two years.
The ONS said the cost of living had yet to be much affected by the drop in the value of the pound seen since the EU referendum, but the Bank of England, the International Monetary Fund and City economists believe that inflation will rise above the government’s 2% target in early 2017 and will reach at least 3% by the end of the year.
Researchers at the Institute for Fiscal Studies thinktank, said the decision by the government in the 2015 summer budget to freeze welfare benefits for the whole of the current parliament meant that 11.5 million families would be an additional £2 a week worse off as a result of higher than anticipated inflation.
The IFS said that families already stood to lose £260 a year as a result of George Osborne’s attempt to reduce the UK’s welfare budget, but they would now see their real incomes drop by £360 a year.
Davies said: “Everybody should be very, very clear how damaging food inflation is to the economy, to retail businesses and manufacturing businesses and how lethal it could be for millions of people struggling to live from week to week.”
He spoke out after Tesco became embroiled in a public spat with one of its main suppliers, Unilever, after the maker of brands including Marmite and Persil demanded an across the board 10% rise in prices in light of the devaluation of the pound after the the EU referendum.
The two companies reached an agreement on Friday after it emerged that Tesco was running low on stocks of more than 20 popular Unilever brands because the supplier halted deliveries when the supermarket would not agree to its price demand.
Davies, who was speaking at the Big Debate conference organised by grocery industry body IGD, said it was clear there were inflationary forces in the UK after the Brexit vote but would not say whether they would feed through to price rises on supermarket shelves.
“Our role is to do everything we can do to prevent food inflation which is not good for business and highly toxic for consumers,” said Davies, who joined Tesco from car parts and bicycle retailer Halfords 18 months ago.
City analysts warned that the jump in consumer prices last month marked the first of many increases that would push inflation towards 3% next year.
Some said it was clear weaker sterling was having an effect, especially on the rising cost of imported clothes and footwear, though the ONS played down the overall impact, saying there was no “explicit evidence” it was having a significant impact on consumer prices.
Andrew Sentance, a former member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee, which sets interest rates, said: “Higher import prices are feeding through to consumers because of the fall in sterling since the EU referendum.
“This latest rise, however, is just the tip of the inflationary iceberg that is coming our way.”
Inflation hovered around zero during 2015 but has been on a gentle upward trend since the turn of the year. Analysts had been expecting a slightly smaller increase to 0.9% in September, but stressed that further increases were in the pipeline in coming months as last autumn’s falls in energy prices ceased to drag down the annual inflation rate.
The increase in the cost of living was widely forecast after an 18% fall in the value of sterling since the Brexit vote on 23 June.
The ONS said food prices dipped slightly in September and the cost of household goods also fell. But this was more than offset by higher petrol costs relative to last year and clothing, especially womenswear.
Last week, the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, said the Bank could tolerate “a bit” of an overshoot against its 2% inflation target to help economic growth and employment.
Beauty products maker Coty Inc has said it would buy Good Hair Day (ghd), a high-end hairstyling appliances brand, from private equity firm Lion Capital LLP for about £420m ($522m).
Coty, which owns hair colour brands such as Wella and Clairol, became the global No 2 in hair colour and styling products through its $12.5bn acquisition of Procter & Gamble’s perfume, hair care and makeup businesses in October.
The business will become part of Coty’s professional beauty unit, which services salon owners and professionals in hair and nail care, and will be a standalone business led by its current chief executive Anthony Davey and team, Coty said on Monday.
The all-cash deal, to conclude by the end of 2016, is expected to immediately add to Coty’s earnings, the company said.
Coty said last year it would shift its executive team to London, as part of its transformation into a global beauty products maker.
Lion Capital and ghd are being advised by Rothschild & Co and Proskauer Rose LLP. Skadden Arps Slate Meagher & Flom LLP is the legal adviser to Coty.
Hadley, you’ve written on Brexit elsewhere in the paper, but not in your style column. Why is that?
You’re right, Robert! I have stayed away from Brexit in this column because that would mean looking at what it means for the fashion industry, and the answer to that is, well, no one knows. Confusion over Brexit, how strange – don’t see that in any other industry, do you?
On the one hand, thanks to the plummeting pound (boo!) luxury goods are now cheaper for tourists (er, yay?). So, for example, a Louis Vuitton Speedy bag is currently about $200 cheaper in the UK for US visitors – although I wouldn’t exactly count this as sticking it to the elites, as the leave campaign repeatedly claimed voting its way would achieve. But, someone at the back bellows, this will help the British industry as a whole. A surge of tourism! Bringing in money! To the economy! Yay!
All right, little Mikey Gove, try to calm yourself. Maybe go and have an ice cream out the back, but not Ben & Jerry’s because we can’t afford that at the moment. So some tourists might spend more at Harrods, but let’s look at what this means on a more granular level, as proper columnists would put it. Yes, British exports will be cheaper, but only if they don’t rely on imported goods and manufacturing. And, as much as it might pain certain members of the Tory party to hear this, pretty much every British fashion brand relies on those two things. This isn’t because British fashion labels are trying to chisel their own nation’s economy with cheap Chinese knockoffs and eastern European workers, but rather because it is simply not possible for most fashion labels to be entirely manufactured in this country, relying instead on European factories and skilled labour. So the net result of Brexit on all this is that British brands will become much more expensive for British customers, as companies find their costs going up and their workforce depleting. Um, yay sovereignty?
Also, let’s look at British fashion as a whole. Now, what this country’s fashion industry has always lacked in terms in of infrastructure, slickness and big-brand money, it has made up for in creativity. At least, that’s what those who work in it love to tell themselves. OK, we don’t have Dior or Calvin Klein, but look! We have the best fashion schools in the world, where the best students from around the world come to study. And look! We also produce some of the most acclaimed designers who then work at the biggest labels around Europe, such as Phoebe Philo (Chloé, Céline), Stella McCartney (Chloé), Alexander McQueen (Givenchy), John Galliano (Givenchy, Dior, Maison Margiela), etc, etc. Yay, Britain! But how, exactly, will this continue to work if it’s harder for foreign students to come here and European companies have to sort out complex visas when they hire British workers? Oh stop worrying, says the leave camp, relying, perhaps, on British fashion’s much-vaunted creativity to get around these little problems.
Finally, I’d say the ultimate problem is bigger and more amorphous than visas. So much in fashion is about image and association: buy a New York label and you’re buying into the fantasy of Manhattan dynamism and power lunches; an Italian label suggests dolce vita glamour; French labels promise chic. British labels, more than any other country’s, play on such national stereotypes: ideas of heritage (the tweed, the crown), punkish rebellion and, most of all, a kind of gonzo creativity in which Britain has always taken pride. But what image, Britain, do we have now, in our post-Brexit era on the global stage? I’d wager it has a lot less to do with enviable sovereignty and more about a silly little country that cut off its nose to spite everyone’s face. Is that the sort of look people want to buy into?
Look, as even Boris Johnson would almost certainly admit if you caught him in a rare moment of honesty, Brexit has far bigger problems facing it than how it will affect the fashion industry. But all of these issues underline the central question of Brexit, which is: what kind of country do we want to live in? Because, at the risk of tipping into pomposity, fashion encapsulates fantasy and aspirational self-image. So when a country’s fashion industry looks like it will struggle to achieve this, on both a practical and mental level, it’s perhaps time to take a good long look in the mirror again.
What to make of Bob Dylan winning the Nobel?
Sure, Dylan knows how to write a line or ten million. But as singer Tracey Thorn quite rightly tweeted last week, “So much Bob adulation is bound up in the fact that he looked so cool,” which is why, she continued, even more rightly, “Paul Simon loses out, because fewer iconic photos.” Truer words were rarely ever tweeted. Sure, Dylan’s fine, but, I’ll be honest, he’s never written anything that has struck me as purely poetical as, say, The Boy in the Bubble, The Boxer or even just the opening lines of Graceland. Also, Simon never wrote any doggerel as tedious as Blowin’ in the Wind. And I don’t see anyone saying he should get a Nobel.
I’m not trying to detract from Dylan (OK, maybe I am, just a little), but isn’t it funny how even the mighty Nobel committee is as swayed by appearances as anyone else? Because Bob’s look – which can be summed up as “Jewish beatnik who pawned his coat” – is undoubtedly as much a part of his legend as his songs. So here, Dylan, have the Ask Hadley award for Most Adored Look. You can keep it next to your Nobel.
Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.
Poor Ronald McDonald. Following the scary clown appearances that shocked people around the globe, the burger chain has decided to cut back on public appearances of its pasty-faced mascot.
That is not the only bad news for McDonald’s, which reports third-quarter figures on Friday. According to the Wall Street Journal, an internal memo shows that only one in five millennials has ever tried a Big Mac.
No wonder the company is trying so hard to reinvent itself. It is now 18 months into a transformation plan led by British-born chief executive Steve Easterbrook, which includes offering all-day breakfasts, improving the quality of the food on offer, and selling thousands of its restaurants to franchisees. Last week it said it would be making $130m of restructuring charges in this latest quarter and would increase the number of restaurants sold to franchisees from 3,500 to 4,000, out of a total of 36,000.
In July, McDonald’s reported a 4% fall in second-quarter revenues amid growing consumer uncertainty. Since then, thanks to further turmoil after the Brexit vote and the increasingly vicious US election campaign, things have hardly improved. Still, analysts expect third-quarter revenues to be unchanged or only marginally lower. Anything else could prove very scary for investors.
With Burberry planning to end its experiment with creative director Christopher Bailey also acting as chief executive, the luxury goods group could be back on the road to recovery.
In the summer, the company announced that Bailey would move back to his creative role, and that Marco Gobbetti, the man behind LVMH’s Céline brand, would take over as chief executive some time in 2017. During his tenure Bailey was unfortunate to face a slowdown in demand for luxury goods, particularly in China and Hong Kong. But since the summer things have picked up, helped by the slump in the pound – which is boosting its overseas profits as well as tempting more tourists to visit London and snap up its trademark beige check.